Explain the purpose of this keyword in Java. Give two practical scenarios in a
real-world program where it is required.
ANSWER



1.The this keyword in Java is a reference variable that refers to the current object of the class. It is
used to differentiate between instance variables and local variables when they have the same
name and to access members (variables, methods, constructors) of the current object.
Purposes of this keyword:
1. To resolve variable shadowing when local (method or constructor) parameters have the same
name as instance variables.
2. To call another constructor in the same class using this().
3. To pass the current object as an argument in a method or constructor.
4. To return the current object from a method.
Scenario 1: Resolving variable shadowing
class Employee {
String name;
int age;
Employee(String name, int age) {
this.name = name; 
this.age = age;
}
}
Scenario 2: Calling another constructor using this()
class Student {
String name;
int marks;
Student() {
this("Unknown", 0); // calls the parameterized constructor
}
Student(String name, int marks) {
this.name = name;
this.marks = marks;
}
}


QUESTION 2
1. Access Modifiers (Banking Example)
default → accessible within same package. Example: double balance;
private → accessible within same class. Example: private String pin;
protected → accessible in same package and subclasses. Example: protected double interestRate;
public → accessible everywhere. Example: public void deposit();






2. Method Overloading vs Overriding
Overloading → same method name, different parameters (compile-time). Example: pay(String card)
and pay(String upi, double amt)
Overriding → same method name, same parameters in subclass (runtime). Example:
OnlinePayment overrides pay() of Payment class
Example: Overloading → different payment methods. Overriding → specific payment logic.
3. Static vs Instance Variables



Static variable → belongs to class, shared by all objects. Example: static int totalUsers;
Instance variable → belongs to object, unique to each object. Example: String userName;
4. Uses of final keyword



final variable → makes value constant. Example: final double DISCOUNT = 0.1;
final method → cannot be overridden. Example: final void checkout()
final class → cannot be inherited. Example: final class PaymentGateway {}
Example: In a shopping app, final double TAX_RATE = 0.18; prevents accidental change.
